ON LAWS IN NATURAL SCIENCE AND HUMANISTICS.

INAUGURATION SPEECH

HELD ON October 15, 1908

FROM

DR. FRANZ EXNER, DZ. RECTOR OF THE VIENNA UNIVERSITY

VIENNA AND LEIPZIG.

ALFRED HÖLDER

K. U. K. FARM AND UNIVERSITY BOOK DEALERS

BOOK DEALER OF THE IMPERIAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES.

1909.

All rights reserved.

Printed by ADOLF HOLZHAUSEN in Vienna, K. AND K. HOF- UND UNIVERSITÄTS-BUCHDRUCKER.

Very respectable gathering!
                     Beginning of paragraph 01

Placed in this honorable place by the trust of my colleagues from all faculties, I had to consider above all whether I would be able to justify this trust; The diversity of our organism is immensely great, and accordingly its needs and expressions of life in every direction are immense. All areas of human knowledge and research are represented here and so whoever wants to do justice to this diversity will have to endeavor to assess the relationship of the individual parts to one another, their interrelationships and differences, if possible. Of course, the goal towards which all disciplines strive towards our alma mater is the same: the exploration of truth, that objective truth that exists unaffected by human feeling and thinking; but the ways to get there, the tools for raising this treasure, are so different that there is hardly any resemblance between many members of our large family, at least outwardly.

End of paragraph 01

Beginning of paragraph 02

After all, one has long since got used to dividing the whole range of disciplines into two large groups, humanistics and natural science, following a natural principle and separating the sphere of influence of man with its rich content from the rest of nature; The representations of these two groups are usually referred to as the humanities on the one hand, and exact sciences on the other. Without wanting to argue in any way about the correctness of these terms, which have become typical, their very existence shows that a sharp separation of the two areas has been considered necessary, and has gradually become accustomed to seeing them as fundamentally different.

End of paragraph 02

Beginning of paragraph 03

I confess that I cannot agree with this view; Of course there is a difference, it is obvious at first glance: natural science has laws, but humanism does not, whereby here the word "law" is not in the ordinary sense of the word as a regularity, but in the sense of a mathematically formulated, at any time and without exception applicable quantitative relationship is to be taken. The astronomer can predict the occurrence of a solar eclipse within a century, the physicist the course of a ray of light, the chemist the occurrence of a reaction with certainty, they all have in a certain sense the quality of a prophet. But can the historian, and if the whole past were clearly in front of his eyes, even predict one event of the next few years with certainty? Certainly not; here the "law" with its strict validity is lacking and so the designation of natural science as "exact" science may have some justification.

End of paragraph 03

Beginning of paragraph 04

Humanistics has often been reproached for not having achieved exact laws anywhere in the course of the development of its disciplines, and just as often the brilliant results of natural science, which were only possible after knowledge of the laws, were credited to researchers as a special honor . I mean that on both sides, with praise and criticism, they did not proceed quite fairly. Of course, there is a difference, it cannot be denied, but whether it is based on the methods of the various disciplines, whether it is as harsh as it seems, whether it is really a principle that divides the world into two parts, is doubtful . And there we find ourselves faced with a problem of extraordinary importance, because it affects the whole field of human knowledge: Are the events that make up the course of world history, are the thousandfold changes in a language that lead to its gradual development, are the processes of daily life Life that ultimately necessitate the establishment of economic, legal or sociological terms, aren't these all processes in nature?

End of paragraph 04

Beginning of paragraph 05

So why are there no laws here? So we are faced with the big question: Are there really two kinds of natures, one in which everything happens according to strict, never-failing laws, and a second that does not know such laws, where events follow one another arbitrarily? It will be very difficult for every researcher to believe in such a dichotomy in nature, but it becomes all the more necessary for us to understand clearly that and why this dichotomy is not a fundamental one, in reality only a gradual one. So from the whole complex of questions that would like to be linked to it, I only pick one out: Why does natural science know strict laws, but humanism does not? and will try as far as I can to answer it.

End of paragraph 05

Beginning of paragraph 06

All natural laws, the word always taken in its strict meaning, are physical laws; Whether the processes take place in heaven as an object of astronomical observation or in the chemist's melting pot or under the microscope of the botanist and physiologist, if they proceed according to law, they obey physical laws. It is the task of the physicist to detach these laws from all accidental accompanying phenomena; It does not matter to him whether one grain of sand attracts the other or the sun attracts the planets; his goal is the generally applicable law, and so he has gradually embraced the whole of nature with such; I intentionally say all of nature, in contrast to dead matter, for example, because all physical laws apply without exception to the living as well as to the inanimate.

End of paragraph 06

Beginning of paragraph 07

An all too naive idea has, as it were, relocated these natural laws as properties in the bodies themselves; it was regarded as a property of the magnet to attract iron, or the celestial body to gravitate towards each other, as a property of light one has reflected or reflected its ability to be broken and thus put the knowledge of the laws into nature itself. However, these laws do not exist in nature; man first formulates them, he uses them as a linguistic and computational aid and only wants to say that the processes in nature proceed as if matter were like a rational being. obey these laws. Newton first established the law of general gravitation and the concept of attraction, but the latter had absolutely no reality for him; it was only intended to express in a concise way that the masses really move under their mutual influence as if such a force and nothing continue to exist.

End of paragraph 07

Beginning of paragraph 08

The laws of nature, however, no matter how they refer to apparently completely different areas, 1 do not lead to mutually independent existences; In accordance with the unity of nature, they subsume under more general, in this sense higher laws, than their special cases, according to the respective conditions, they appear. The course of events in nature is seemingly random and chaotic: Countries and seas have changed their roles in the course of time, rain and sunshine pass us in random order, plants, animals and people arise and pass with everything that makes their life fills out, and if you only think through one day of your life with all the small changes that affect you, what abundance of events is there? One would desperate to find a common thread here that serves as a guide through this tangle. But the chaos of the appearance gradually disappears, we notice that the events do not follow one another as arbitrarily as it appears, we recognize that by no means every event is possible and that the appearances could have been as well as different. Above all, we find that no event in nature can be reversed by itself, everything strives towards a certain goal; In the short period of human life, of course, we scarcely notice the change that has taken place in nature in this way, but in every single case it comes to mind. We see the stone fall, the water rush from the mountains, but neither eye has a stone rise by itself nor see the water flow up the mountain. The scent of an open smelling bottle will soon spread across a larger room, but we will wait in vain for it to withdraw into the bottle by itself. The embers of the heated stove warms a room; But has it ever been observed that in the summer the heat of July in a room would concentrate by itself in the stove and ignite a fire there? And as in these individual cases, so in general everything that happens in nature tends towards a definite goal; The physicist calls this process dissipation of energy, which includes organic and inorganic, dead and living matter and all human activity in the same way.

End of paragraph 08

Beginning of paragraph 09

But why, we have to ask, aren't the processes in nature irregular? Is it because there are laws? The laws are abstracted from the processes and only prove that these, but not why, they run regularly. At this turning point in human knowledge I have to remember a man whose activity I cannot reverently mention at this point, L. Boltzmann. It was he who first gave this direction of general events a definite and clear interpretation; To put it briefly, he has shown that the world in its development is constantly changing from less probable to more probable and thus increasingly stable states. Boltzmann was the most ardent supporter and defender of the atomistic worldview, an idea that has never led to contradictions with experience, but has certainly promoted our knowledge in all areas, an idea that all matter is made up of extremely numerous and extremely small particles, the molecules, consists in constant and irregular movement that we perceive as warmth. In the case of very simply constituted bodies, e.g. the gases, we know the number and size of these molecules and their velocities with sufficient accuracy and that is why Boltzmann chose the gases as the starting point for his considerations. The question which he asked himself and which he discussed with all sharpness in every direction, in order to finally decide it with a completely affirmative; Was that: The state of a gas, as it is well known to us experimentally through the laws, is it perhaps nothing more than the result of a coincidence, than the result of the coincidental individual movements of the innumerable molecules in it? As I said, the answer to the question is in the affirmative and we have the key to everything else in hand.

End of paragraph 09

Beginning of paragraph 10

It is a widespread mistake to believe that random events must also have a random (ie indefinite) result; if so, the finance minister would have long since canceled the lottery, but experience shows that the certainly random events of the draws produce a very specific result. But one condition must be met if one is to be expected: the random events must follow one another in large numbers. If we play the well-known game of heads or writing with a coin, the result of every single throw is completely random and it is possible at the beginning of the game that heads or writing are in the majority. But if the events accumulate, so here the throws, the result strives towards a very specific value, equality, and comes closer and closer to this over time in order to reach it exactly after an infinite number of throws. It should be noted that the time itself does not play a role, but only the number of individual events, that it does not matter whether the throws follow one another quickly or slowly, if it happens enough often, just as the result of a lottery drawing does not depend on it whether all numbers are drawn in the same hour or at intervals of days and years. What the throws or draws in these examples are, in the case of all matter, the accidental molecular movements inside the body; they are the individual events from which the state of a body that is visible to us emerges according to the laws of probability. And since these movements are extraordinarily large in number and repeat themselves millions and billions of times a second in the smallest corpuscle accessible to our observation, we can and must expect to find the most probable state in each case. In one cubic centimeter of the air around us, we have such an enormous number of molecules that, for example, B. the number of people who have ever populated the earth disappears.

End of paragraph 10

Beginning of paragraph 11

All of these molecules move in disarray at great speeds that are on average equal to those of bullets. But the path taken by the individual molecule will be entirely random; it will depend on how often and in which directions it collides with other molecules, and with each such collision its own direction and speed will be changed. However, as Boltzmann's calculation has shown, this chaos of random events necessarily leads to precisely those states and properties that we actually observe in gases. Some distribution of velocities among the molecules will turn out to be the most likely; Very small and very high speeds will be correspondingly improbable and therefore rare; those of medium size will occur most frequently and essentially determine the state of the body. But since here the individual events follow one another so quickly that even the smallest observation time, on the other hand, must be regarded as practically infinitely long, we should not be surprised if we find the gas in its most probable state with every observation. But that means nothing else than we observe regularities in bodies that are produced exclusively by chance; But the fact that these laws turn out differently in the various fields of physics is due to the fact that the conditions are by no means the same in all cases under which these movements take place. But since all matter is molecularly constituted, the basic condition for the occurrence of a certain most probable state, namely the extraordinarily large number of accidental individual events, is given everywhere and with it the possibility of a law.

End of paragraph 11

Beginning of paragraph 12

If we were able to slow down the molecular movement so tremendously that we could follow the individual molecular processes, we would perceive nothing but a chaos of random events in which we would search in vain for a regularity; We would have to wait eons of years before, under these conditions, the body would have reached its most probable state, that state that normally occurs in vanishingly small fractions of a second, and so it is clear and must be emphasized that where the accidental events are at slowly follow one another, there can also be no question of a law.

End of paragraph 12

Beginning of paragraph 13

I would still like to use a simple example to show how laws of nature arise. If we play with two dice, the position of the individual dice is completely accidental with each throw, including the number of eyes it shows; but are all the possible sums, from two to twelve, to be expected with the same probability? Not at all. For the number two can only be thrown in one way, and so can the number twelve; however, z. For example, the number four already appears in three ways through the combination of two-two, one-three and three-one, and since every position of the individual cube is equally probable, on average the sum four is also three times as often expect his as the sum of two or twelve. Of all possible combinations, however, it is easy to convince yourself that the number seven is the one that has the greatest probability for itself, and in addition there are always the numbers that deviate from the seven up or down by the same amount, i.e. eight and six, nine and five, etc., equally probable among each other, so that with a large number of repetitions of the experiment the average number of seven approaches more and more, although in every single case the position of each cube is accidental. If we continue the game indefinitely, we can expect with absolute certainty to have thrown the number seven on average. In practice we are not yet talking about a law here, at most about a regularity or probability, because we are actually still dealing with the individual events, the throws; But if these would follow one another so quickly, let's say millions of times in a second, that we could no longer follow the individual moments of the process but only had the average result of the whole, we would find that the number seven would appear every time, and so we could and should pronounce it as a law in the strict sense of the word that one rolls the number seven with two dice.

End of paragraph 13

Beginning of paragraph 14

This is how laws of nature arise; a system which consists of in and for itself completely accidental events will, depending on the conditions under which it stands, strive towards a certain most probable and thus lawful state. But the example teaches us even more; It shows us that the result can only be expected with absolute certainty after the occurrence of an infinite number of individual events, but with a finite number of them only with a certain degree of probability, which, however, increases the more the events accumulate. Since no natural phenomenon that we can observe really consists of an infinite number of parts, there is also no absolute natural law, all of our laws are only laws of probability; But of course, the probability that our prediction has to offer can be so enormous that it equates to certainty by human standards.


End of paragraph 14

Beginning of paragraph 15

There are no exact laws of nature in the mathematical sense of the word; And if there were, we could not convince ourselves of their exactness, because that would only be possible through experiment, but all experiments are necessarily flawed and so we would never come to complete agreement between law and experiment.

End of paragraph 15

Beginning of paragraph 16

From the earlier example with the dice there follows something that is important for further considerations; if we expect the final result with a high probability (with an infinite number of throws with certainty) to be the number seven, then this is an average value that relates to all previous throws. The individual throw is random and so we cannot say that we have to throw about seven in the next throws, we can only expect to get an average of seven again in the next set of many throws. So the law is only an average law and applied to the individual case or to a few of them, it completely loses its meaning.

End of paragraph 16

Beginning of paragraph 17

The extent to which the individual events must accumulate in order for us to be able to expect a certain average result depends entirely on the degree of probability that we demand. The number of numbers placed in the lottery in one year, i.e. the number of individual games, guarantees such a high probability of winning that you can put it in the budget with confidence. The business of insurance companies is based on the statistics collected, i.e. always on a limited number of cases, but experience has shown that these are generally sufficient.

End of paragraph 17

Beginning of paragraph 18

But if the individual events here count by thousands, perhaps also by millions in a year, that is still a very negligible number compared to the molecular processes from which the physicist derives his laws, because even in the smallest object there are trillions every second random operations. In one cubic centimeter of air there are so many accidental collisions among the molecules every second that they could only be expressed by a number with 28 digits; So it is easy to assess that the probability that our laws have is of a completely different order of magnitude than that of the winner of the lottery, and that this probability, humanly speaking, equals certainty.

End of paragraph 18

Beginning of paragraph 19

But on a small scale, in terms of both time and space, the laws of physics are unlikely to apply; the stone falls to the ground and we know exactly the law by which it moves. Whether this law also applies to any small fraction of movement, for trillionths or trillionths of a second, is more than doubtful. Here, too, the movement in the smallest of times is probably a random one, sometimes faster, sometimes slower than our law requires, perhaps jerkily, but we cannot notice anything, we are only observing the average of the movement and this is lawful. We can certainly indicate the movement of water in a channel, but the path that the individual water particle describes is a completely random one and defies the laws of flow.

End of paragraph 19

Beginning of paragraph 20

So we have to understand all so-called exact laws only as average laws, which do not apply with absolute certainty, but with the greater probability from the more individual processes they result. All physical laws go back to molecular processes of a random nature and from them the result follows according to the laws of probability calculation, in that the world in its parts and as a whole changes from less probable states to more probable ones. We have already seen why this transition takes place in the example with the two dice: Throwing the number seven is most likely because the most possibilities are available, but all possibilities are equally probable according to coincidence. For an event occurs where chance reigns, the more frequently the more probable it is. This theorem, known as the law of large numbers, is not proven, nor is it provable, but it is taken from man's thousandfold experience and forms the foundation of all probability calculations. In fact, it is the only law that governs everything that happens in nature; it says that those states must always occur1 for whose existence the most possibilities are available.

End of paragraph 20

Beginning of paragraph 21

What determines the degree of probability of a condition, I would like to illustrate very briefly with the following example. We take a handful of grains of wheat and throw them on the ground at random; Nobody will expect that the grains will form a conspicuously regular figure, a star or circle, that letters and words of well-known meaning will result, but some very irregular distribution will be the result. But this distribution, as it actually occurs, is no more probable than any of the regular arrangements mentioned earlier, we only overlook the fact that there is an immensely large number of the irregular arrangements, the regular, i.e. striking, but only an infinitesimally small number. But we simply oppose the regularity to the irregularity, and since for the latter the number of possibilities is extraordinarily much greater, the irregularity will be the average to be expected, that is, the most probable result. And so any initially ordered system will naturally go into disorder when subjected to a large number of random events. If we were to arrange the grains of wheat in a regular shape from the beginning and then subject them to random vibrations of the ground, the regularity would very soon be lost. So total disorder is the most likely condition; Every housewife knows that, every librarian knows that. If the books in a library were initially ordered and their use were left entirely to chance, their regular arrangement would soon disappear, simply because it is very unlikely that every book would be put back in its place by accident, since there is only one right, but a lot of wrong places. So it would also be very unlikely, because regular condition, if z. For example, if all the molecules in a body had the same speed, and if one were able to produce it artificially, the body, left to its own devices, would not remain in this improbable state for a second, but would pass into the ordinary, disordered state. So none of us will experience that at a certain moment all people in Vienna who are on the street walk at exactly the same speed, even if the possibility of doing so must be admitted because this singular trap of order is faced with an extraordinarily large number of opposing possibilities .
End of paragraph 21

Beginning of paragraph 22

That is why we have to regard every ordered state, as paradoxical as it sounds, as unnatural, as a state that we can only maintain artificially through constant interventions against nature and against the law of chance. All legal laws, written and unwritten, that keep the course of society in order are nothing other than such interventions; Its effect seems tremendously great to us, and yet it only plays a subordinate role in the budget of nature, regulating only a tiny fraction of general events. But, of course, what we see in the vicinity, what immediately surrounds us, that seems large and meaningful to us, the distance blurs in space as in time and what it conceals loses interest. But that is why we do not want to forget that man and his actions are only a tiny episode in world history.

End of paragraph 22

Beginning of paragraph 23

Herbert Spencer says: "Evolution is a change from irregularity to uniformity, from indeterminacy to definiteness, from disorder to order." But that is exactly the opposite of the result we got. Well, it's not exactly the first time that philosophers and naturalists have answered a question in different ways, but perhaps more often than you think the difference, like here, is more apparent than real. If one understands by order a condition that reveals regularities, as Herbert Spencer probably means, then we agree completely, only we have seen that such conditions are permanent, i. H. amenable to observation and only occur by themselves because the accidental individual events which they cause are completely disordered, for only in this way will a certain state occur predominantly often, precisely that which we then call the law of appearance.

End of paragraph 23

Beginning of paragraph 24

We must not overlook one circumstance of importance here; should a sequence of random events to a specifiable goal, d. H. lead to a certain average state, the external conditions must not change until enough events have occurred to provide a useful average value. Because depending on these external conditions, the most probable state is always different and so it would not come to an end if these conditions were to change almost as quickly as the events follow one another. The number seven is the average value when playing with two dice; for three, four or more dice, different numbers would apply and so we could not expect a specific value if the number of dice - that is the external condition here - changes at will while rolling the dice.

End of paragraph 24

Beginning of paragraph 25

So we would have recognized a number of circumstances that lead to the regularity of a phenomenon or, in the extreme case, to an exact law: a large number of random individual events must take place in such quick succession that we can only observe their average value, and during this time the external conditions must also remain unchanged. All physical laws arise in this way, even the laws of optics would not be valid, the oscillations of light would not be so fast that we only have the average effect of billions of them in mind. And if we occupy the voices of an orchestra several times in order to amplify the sound, and this really increases the fullness of the tone, it is again just a game of chance, the effect of which can be expected with such great certainty because the vibrations of the sound too are very fast.

End of paragraph 25

Beginning of paragraph 26

But from all of this we will take an important fact: No natural law can apply with absolute severity. It is always only a high degree of probability with which we can expect a certain event to occur; Exceptions can and must even occur in the course of infinite time. But such individual phenomena, which contradict the laws of nature, we call miracles and so we necessarily come to assert their possibility. But of course, can we expect to ever experience such a thing? When the handful of wheat grains that we sprinkle on the ground happen to be arranged in a predetermined word, we would like to address such a thing as a miracle; It is possible without a doubt, but no one will experience it, because this singular case of order is faced with such an enormous number of equally probable disordered states due to the large number of wheat grains and their possible arrangements that we repeat the experiment over and over again would have to do the desired before. Result would be expected. However, the number of molecules in bodies is of a completely different order of magnitude than that of the grains of wheat in our example, so that an exception to a physical law is even more improbable and the possibility of its occurrence is completely beyond human imagination. Do we not have a right to speak of the exactness of the laws of nature? Mathematically we do not have it, but in the human sense of the word the laws have absolute validity insofar as we can rightly expect that no one will ever experience an exception to them.

End of paragraph 26

Beginning of paragraph 27

So we see that the laws of nature do not apply with absolute certainty either, but only as long and insofar as the random individual events whose effects they represent are very numerous. If the number of these drops, the degree of probability for the validity of the law drops at the same time and finally, when the object of our observation is no longer the average values ??but the individual events themselves, as when rolling the dice, we come to the area of ??complete chance, where all regularity has disappeared .

End of paragraph 27

Beginning of paragraph 28

And so we have come to the point where we must easily see why in the field of humanistics, in contrast to natural science, laws rarely occur but never laws.

End of paragraph 28

Beginning of paragraph 29

All objects of humanistic research are also processes in nature; be it the course of world history, national-economic problems or the origin and development of languages, there is always a plethora of individual events that do not take place separately from nature, but as a piece of it. Emperors and kings are subject to the laws of nature as well as any stone, and they cannot move them by a hair's breadth; So why, we must ask, does the course of world history not follow just as strict laws as the course of the stars? Certainly here too the individual events, namely the actions of people and the circumstances which bring them about, are by and large only of a coincidental nature. Man acts according to free will, that is true, but what he wants, what he in every moment of his Wanting to live depends on a thousand-link chain of coincidences. And so here, too, the law of chance will come into play; in the course of time the human race must also change from less probable to more probable states. If we compare the condition of a civilized people with that of wild tribes or even of prehistoric man, as far as we know of them, we find a striking uniformity on this side in contrast to a wealth of inequalities in physical, intellectual and social relations on the other which increases the older the culture gets. As we know, however, uniformity is a very improbable condition, which by itself always turns into that of irregularity, of disorder, in which, with regard to each individual moment, an average value is most common, but deviating upwards or downwards all the more occur less frequently the further they move away from the mean. Hence the large number of average people in every people, who face only a few geniuses but also only a few very deep individuals; therefore also in material relation the class of the middle class as opposed to the isolated appearances of the very rich and totally dispossessed. The completely even distribution of spiritual as well as material goods would be an extraordinarily improbable condition, but we approach it all the more the further we look backwards in culture and in time. In general, the development of history may be analogous to that of another natural phenomenon, but why does it then show us no laws? We can only expect laws where the result of a very large number of random events is available to us; Now, of course, the events of world history are numerous, but whether laws result in sufficient numbers that would be equivalent to physical ones in terms of accuracy, that can only be determined by comparison. Even if the physicist operates with a mass the size of the head of a pin and only for one second, a very large number of random events, the molecular movements, have already taken place in his hand during this time. How long would the historian have to wait to have the same number available? That is difficult to estimate, because the individual event in the development of history cannot be determined with certainty; We can perhaps take the individual human life or individual actions of human beings for it, but if we ourselves make the surely exaggerated assumption that out of a hundred million people each one effectively intervenes in the course of history once every second, it would still be almost three thousand It would take millions of years for the historian to have the abundance of events available to the physicist in the course of a second. Can we still expect laws there? But even if our lifespan extended over such periods of time and we could see everything that happened at a glance, we would still not discover a law, because such a law, as we know, presupposes that the development of a system always takes place under the same conditions carries out; if these change during the process, the process strives towards a different end state, and it goes without saying that the conditions of historical development would change completely more than once in such periods.

End of paragraph 29

Beginning of paragraph 30

The laws of nature are always only average laws; if the historian himself succeeded in the impossible in surveying the course of events in millions of years, he could not say how things would develop in the following century, but at most what the average result of the following million years will be. But it will be said that not only the visible events have an effect in the course of history, but the whole abundance of those imponderables that cannot be grasped; but the physicist finds himself in the same position. By imponderables we understand events whose physical correlate remains unknown to us and only too often does the physicist come into the position of having to come to terms with them: he calls forces the same; And so we speak in complete analogy of historical, of intellectual forces, but while with us these imponderables follow one another so quickly that the forces act according to laws, they still have the character of chance in the historian.

End of paragraph 30

Beginning of paragraph 31

And as in history, it must behave similarly in all areas of humanistic research, because where man determines the individual events, they proceed relatively slowly. Languages ??and scripts arise and perish as their development takes place through constant accidental changes in use in everyday life. Even a superficial estimate cannot be made about the time periods required for this, but here, too, hundreds of thousands of years would have to work in undisturbed succession for one to be able to speak of a law.

End of paragraph 31

Beginning of paragraph 32

The beginnings of regularities can of course be recognized here as in history, the grammar, the sound formation are examples of this, but how far is the way from these rules to a natural law? But if we could also follow the development of a language to the end, that would not be enough; We would have to know thousands of them in order to be able to pronounce it as a law, as on average the next thousand will be formed.

End of paragraph 32

Beginning of paragraph 33

And so it may be in all areas where man and his activity form the individual event; yes I believe that in general the intellectual level of a people goes through the same development. An infinite series of random events leads from less probable conditions to more probable ones; from the almost uniform level in animals and lower human species, the highly differentiated state of education and culture with all its opposites gradually develops. If we didn't have to fear too much to leave the safe ground of numbers, it would be tempting to think about the spiritual types with their laws, such as B. to attribute the styles in the various fields of art and their development to the same general cause.

End of paragraph 33

Beginning of paragraph 34

Thus there appears to be a deep gulf between the fields of exact and humanistic science, and yet the difference is only a gradual one, conditioned by the different objects of research on both sides and by their relationship to the lifespan of man. But this is limited and given; it is very great compared to the individual events of the molecular world and that is why there are laws here; but it is small compared to the development processes in the humanistic field and that is why there are no laws here.

End of paragraph 34

Beginning of paragraph 35

This accidental position of man in nature determines the difference; an intellect with a lifespan of millions of years could make this difference disappear. Schiller says aptly: "Higher spirits see the delicate cobwebs of an act run through the entire stretch of the world system and perhaps cling to the most remote borders of the future and the past - where man sees nothing but the fact that is floating in the open air."

End of paragraph 35

Beginning of paragraph 36

From this situation, however, we may also infer how unfair the charge is that the humanists are unable to put the results of their research into exact laws, and further how hopeless it is to look for such in areas where none exist. It is given to humanists to observe and study individual events which, even if they are accidental, are certainly able to captivate interest as much as the individual human life itself, which is only the product of chance; we, who observe the regular average values, have no insight into the individual processes of matter, as far as human foresight is sufficient.

End of paragraph 36

Beginning of paragraph 37

I used to speak of the apparent gap between exact and humanistic research, as it is perhaps most clearly shown when we choose physics and history as the two representatives; I have called this gap an apparent one, because in fact it is not irreconcilable. All transitions can be found between the two extremes, you come towards each other from both sides. Are all natural sciences in a position to be able to establish exact laws? Not at all. The so-called descriptive natural sciences such as botany, zoology, mineralogy, no less geology or meteorology, as well as the whole range of medical disciplines, none of them know any laws in the exact sense of the word, because in all these areas the individual events follow one another far too slowly. In botany and zoology, insofar as they are descriptive in nature, the life of the individual is the single event; only in the course of geological epochs do they multiply in such a way that, if not yet laws, at least regularities come to light. Here, too, we see the development from the more uniform, that is, improbable, state of the simple cells gradually progressing to the more probable of the differentiated species and genera as we know them today. Certainly the end of this development has not yet been reached, yes, one can say with some certainty that it will never be reached, for while all life is tending towards the most probable state, the external conditions are constantly changing, so that in each case another state is the most probable before the first is reached. Hence the extinction of species in the course of geological epochs and the appearance of new ones, which again strive for a different end goal, apparently following a certain determinant, in reality the law of chance.

End of paragraph 37

Beginning of paragraph 38

The constancy of our species over the foreseeable future suggests that quite probable states have already been reached, but the calculation teaches that, even if these occur by far the most frequently, we can and even come across less probable, deviating ones from time to time must, only these deviations will occur less frequently the more significant the amount of the deviation is. The bean develops into a bean over and over again in generations because that is its most likely development, but among the billions of cases there must also be random deviations from time to time; the biologist calls them mutations, which are only so rare because they are are just improbable, and the more improbable the greater the deviation. It is not impossible that an apple tree suddenly bears cherries, it would only be such a strong deviation from the most probable case that it is extremely improbable and its occurrence would be tantamount to a miracle, i.e. H. we consider the case to be practically impossible.

End of paragraph 38

Beginning of paragraph 39

The development of the most probable state corresponding to the prevailing circumstances is called adaptation, if it affects living organisms; But the process is by no means restricted to living things; it occurs just as well and for exactly the same reasons in dead matter. The fact that the water freezes at zero degrees is an adaptation to this temperature, because this particular arrangement of the molecules is not the only possible one at zero degrees; but by far the most likely. So the theory of descent appears to us as a special case of the general law of probability.

End of paragraph 39

Beginning of paragraph 40

But even if there are no laws in descriptive botany and zoology, there are laws. Everyone knows the leaf of the oak and will know how to distinguish it from a hundred others, and yet none are completely alike. In size, weight, and shape fluctuations around a common type are shown, which is the most probable precisely for matter under the circumstances under which it exists in the oak leaf; and again small deviations from this state are far more probable than large ones, so that we will never see an oak bear, say, linden leaves. So there is a certain regularity, but no law; we wanted to try such a For example, to establish the weight of the leaves, we would have to determine the average value of many millions of them, then we could say that the weight of the oak leaf is so or so great. But that would again not apply to the individual leaf, whose weight is random, but only to the average of the next million that we are examining. In such a way, we would gradually approach the exactness of a physical law if we went over to ever larger and larger numbers without ever reaching it, for the number of oak leaves around the world is much smaller than the number of molecules in the smallest with Particles of matter are still visible to the naked eye.

End of paragraph 40

Beginning of paragraph 41

Since there are, after all, many more plants and animals than humans, and their lifespan is also shorter, one understands the stronger emergence of laws in these areas compared to humanistic ones; but there are no strict laws here or there. Only where the biologist or the physiologist approaches the field of molecular processes can one expect to come across stricter laws, such as those found by the mineralogist in the formation of crystals, where it is essentially a question of molecular effects.

End of paragraph 41

Beginning of paragraph 42

One might be tempted to attribute the lack of laws in the descriptive natural sciences to physics to the influence of living in contrast to dead matter; there is no reason to do so. We see in other natural sciences, which, like physics, only deal with dead matter, but nevertheless know no laws, that it is not the nature of the events but only the number of them that is the decisive factor. A typical example of this is meteorology. Where does the proverbial unreliability of the weather forecast come from? only from the insufficient number of individual events from which it is inferred. Vienna has a certain mean annual temperature, derived from more than a century of observations, but can we therefore say that the mean annual temperature for the coming year will be so and so much? Certainly not; it will approach this value and strong deviations from it will be unlikely, but we can only say with some certainty that on average over the next hundred years the temperature will show this value again. But if the timescale suddenly shrank so much that a hundred years seemed like a small fraction of a second: then the low meteorological probability would turn into physical certainty.

End of paragraph 42

Beginning of paragraph 43

But there are natural sciences in which the individual events follow one another much more slowly; In geological processes, they can be separated from one another by millennia and, if you wanted to put the formation of an earth into a law, you would have to know the life story not of one but of thousands of earths in order to be able to predict the average for the next thousands.

End of paragraph 43

Beginning of paragraph 44

Thus the descriptive sciences are essentially much closer to humanistics than to physics, even if externally, according to the objects of their research, they are far removed from it; they fill a considerable part of the gap that seems to gap between exact science and humanism. But we will also have to expect an advance into this gap from the other side; only not all disciplines will be equally suitable for the development of laws. Above all, we will be able to expect them where the accidental events follow one another as quickly and frequently as possible, especially in areas that deal with the events of daily life.

End of paragraph 44

Beginning of paragraph 45

I want to single out an example of national economy here. Money and the value of money change hands daily and hourly; the guilder rolls, but which direction is left to chance. It will depend on the coincidence of the moment whether someone buys a piece of bread or a hat and whether the guilder that the baker earns goes to a tailor or shoemaker. Of course, besides these accidental circulations, there are also those which are caused by external forces; one of the most powerful of these is e.g. B. the tax, but since it only takes away a small fraction of our otherwise free property, we do not want to overestimate its influence on the movement of money as a whole. But if the circulation is determined - essentially - by chance, then the laws of probability also apply. What then must the distribution of property be? In the case of only a few individuals it would be entirely accidental and lawless, but in a state the number of individual events may already be so great that a regularity results. The most probable condition towards which such a random distribution tends to be is a very specific one, but it is not the uniformity, which would rather be very improbable, but the fact that a certain amount of property, the average value, is to be found in most individuals, is smaller and larger possessions, on the other hand, occur the less frequently, the more they deviate from this mean value, so that no possession at all or an enormously large one is equally improbable. Undoubtedly this is the picture the modern state shows, but it has certainly not been so all the time. In uncultivated peoples we find a much more even distribution, which in primeval times may well have gone up to complete equality. But such is, as said, extremely improbable and so here too the development has taken its course according to the general law from the improbable to the probable. It cannot be said whether the final state has been reached, since the statistics are unfortunately too inadequate to compare the real state with the required exactly, but by and large they probably confirm the conclusions drawn.

End of paragraph 45

Beginning of paragraph 46

But if the most probable distribution of goods or a similar condition has occurred, this does not mean that a certain individual has a certain possession in the long run; on the contrary, it follows with necessity that the bearers of such a permanent individuality switch; the poor become rich and the rich sexes become impoverished over time. What remains constant is the definable distribution of property among individuals, but not their individuality. Another important conclusion is to be drawn from this: if the distribution of goods is really based essentially on chance, that is, takes place with the necessity of a natural process, then we will not be able to change anything as long as the state of culture remains the same. What seems to be a natural necessity, that greatest poverty and greatest wealth coincidentally coexist, is seen often enough as injustice and the call for equalizing justice, possibly for completely equal distribution of property, is often raised. But that would be just as unreasonable as complaining that the bricks of a new building do not rise by themselves. Nothing will be changed in this distribution, because it is the necessary consequence of the respective cultural state; However, complete uniformity in the distribution would be such an enormously improbable condition that it would never occur by itself, and if it were also possible to produce it artificially, in the shortest possible time it would revert to natural inequality. But does it follow from this that one has to pay homage to the kismet of the Orientals? I do not think so. It is in human nature that everyone is closest to himself, not just every individual, but every class, every society in the state, and that the well-being and "\ i \ 'before of the neighbor comes closer to us than the fate of us unknown." People. So everyone will endeavor to influence the state locally in his favor, but what he gives himself, he necessarily takes from another, whose fate, removed from his eyes, is indifferent to him. So social endeavors do not change the course of nature inhibit, do not change the fate of the general public and only those who like to indulge in utopias and do not look beyond their immediate neighborhood can believe that they are permanently influencing the lot of the people through such means; but one cannot force the water to flow up the mountain by laws.

End of paragraph 46

Beginning of paragraph 47

It is not the place here to go into further consequences of this view, otherwise it could be shown. that some problems of political economy are connected with it. that z. B. the decreasing tendency of the rate of interest with advancing culture is a consequence of the gradual approach to the most probable distribution of goods. But I just wanted to say that in the humanistic field as well as in the descriptive natural sciences, regularities come to light. if the case is favorable, d. H. when a large number of individual events take effect. If we had precise statistics of human property and its distribution in different countries and times - which is theoretically quite possible - laws could also be established in this area that would be completely equivalent to the laws of descriptive natural sciences.

End of paragraph 47

Beginning of paragraph 48

And so the series of disciplines that comprise the knowledge of the outside world is continuously closed; Nowhere do we see a fundamental difference, everywhere only a difference of degree, as it is given by the nature of the objects by themselves. If humanistics does not provide such clear laws as physics, we know that this is inevitably inherent in its nature and that the use of other methods cannot change anything, because where there are no laws, none can be found. *)

End of paragraph 48

Beginning of paragraph 49

*) In the series of disciplines mentioned here, one will perhaps miss one that is considered the prototype of accuracy and whose laws are tainted with absolute truth, mathematics. But this does not fall within the scope of our considerations, because its objects are not given in nature, they are of a purely conceptual nature; In nature there is no sphere, no circle, no straight line and the laws that refer to these structures do not arise in nature, they lie in its definitions.

End of paragraph 49

Beginning of paragraph 50

If I briefly summarize what has been said, I come to the following conclusion: Everything that happens in nature is the result of chance events; The greater the number of individual events that make up a phenomenon under certain external conditions, the more likely it will have a certain character and the more certain regularities will emerge. If the probability that such a thing occurs every time is so great that it becomes a certainty for human terms, then we speak of a "law". But this is only possible with the large number of individual events that occur in molecular processes. In all other areas there are no laws, only regularities, and these become all the more doubtful the smaller the number of events from which they are derived, and finally, when the number of them is too small, pass over into accidental phenomena. The living does not play a role, especially the two end links of the series, physics and geology, deal exclusively with dead matter, but their time scales are different and therefore the difference in their results.

End of paragraph 50

Beginning of paragraph 51

Very poor, I know, is the picture that we construct for ourselves of what is happening in the world, but it is thoroughly uniform and self-contained; it removes the old dichotomy between exact research and those sciences which do not know strict laws; it shows that there are really no exact laws of nature, that all human knowledge differs from the outside world only by different degrees of probability. And these degrees are not conditioned by the type of research, they are given by the type of object of each discipline, and so each will joyfully and enviously acknowledge the results of the other. Unsere Anschauung lässt aber auch die ganze Welt, sie sei lebendig oder tot, als eine durchaus einheitliche Erkennen, einem einzigen Gesetze, dem der Wahrscheinlichkeit unterworfen.

Ende Paragraph 51

Beginning of paragraph 52

And our alma mater, is it something other than a reflection of this wide world? Isn't it a microcosm that encompasses everything the world has to offer? Here everyone who wants to prepare for the struggles of life will find the world spread out in front of them, but not only the world as it is, but, and this is how the university differs in principle from all other teaching institutions, also the world as it has become. Only a fool can see something superfluous in it; to the discerning person, the career in each area shows the most probable state towards which it is heading; this is the only way we can hope to glimpse the future. But isn't the university as an institution itself the result of centuries of development? Certainly this is only the accumulation of a large number of random events, under whose influence the university, as it is now, has turned out to be the most appropriate state. But we know that such a development only progresses as long as the external conditions of it do not change. Well, for the university, up to the present day, there has essentially only been one condition to which its whole constitution and its innermost being is adapted, that is the absolute freedom of research and teaching. As long as this is preserved for us and it will be preserved, our alma mater will always be a faithful image of the whole world: "as wonderful as on the first day". when the external conditions of the same do not change. Well, for the university up to the present day there has essentially only been one condition to which its entire constitution and its innermost being is adapted, that is the absolute freedom of research and teaching. As long as this is preserved for us and it will be preserved, our alma mater will always be a faithful image of the whole world: "as wonderful as on the first day". when the external conditions of the same do not change. Well, for the university up to the present day there has essentially only been one condition to which its entire constitution and its innermost being is adapted, that is the absolute freedom of research and teaching. As long as this is preserved for us and it will be preserved, our alma mater will always be a faithful image of the whole world: "as wonderful as on the first day".

Ende Paragraph 52


St. Gilgen, 28. August 1908.

Ende Paragraph 53
