ON LAWS IN NATURAL SCIENCE AND HUMANITIES.

INAUGURATION SPEECH

Held on 15 October 1908

FROM

DR. FRANZ EXNER, DZ. RECTOR OF THE VIENNA UNIVERSITY

VIENNA AND LEIPZIG.

ALFRED HOLDER

K. U. K. COURT AND UNIVERSITY BOOKSELLERS

BOOKSELLER OF THE IMPERIAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES.

1909.

All rights reserved.

Printed by ADOLF HOLZHAUSEN in Vienna, K. UND K. HOF- UND UNIVERSITÄTS-BUCHDRUCKER.

Handsome gathering!
                     Beginning of Paragraph 01

Placed in this honourable place by the trust of my colleagues from all faculties, I had to consider above all whether I would be able to justify this trust; the diversity of our organism is immense and the needs and the expressions of life in every direction are correspondingly immense. For all fields of human knowledge and research are represented here, and so whoever wants to do justice to this diversity must endeavour to assess the relationship of the individual parts to one another, their interrelationships and differences, as far as possible. Of course, the goal to which all the disciplines of our alma mater are striving is the same: the exploration of truth, that objective truth which exists unaffected by human feeling and thinking; but the ways to achieve this, the tools for raising this treasure, are so different in nature that there is hardly any similarity between many members of our great family, at least externally.

End of Paragraph 01

Start of paragraph 02

For a long time people have become accustomed to dividing the whole wealth of disciplines into two large groups, humanities and natural sciences, following a natural principle and separating the sphere of influence of man with its rich content from the rest of nature; the humanities on the one hand, and the exact sciences on the other hand, are the representatives of these two groups. Without wanting to be in any way right about what is true of these terms that have become typical, their very existence proves that a sharp separation of the two fields has been considered necessary, and that they have gradually become accustomed to seeing the two as fundamentally different.

End of paragraph 02

Start of paragraph 03

I confess that I cannot agree with this view; of course there is a difference, it is obvious at first sight: natural science has laws, humanistics does not, whereby here the word "law" is not to be taken in the ordinary sense of the word as a lawfulness, but in the sense of a mathematically formulatable quantitative relationship that is always and without exception correct. The astronomer can predict the occurrence of a solar eclipse for a century, the physicist the course of a ray of light, the chemist the occurrence of a reaction with certainty, they all have the quality of prophets in a certain sense. But can the historian alone, and would the whole of the past be clearly before his eyes, predict with certainty even one event of the coming years? Certainly not; here the "law" with its strict validity is lacking, and so the designation of natural science as an "exact" science may also have some justification.

End of Paragraph 03

Start of paragraph 04

Humanistic studies has often been reproached for not having been able to establish exact laws in the course of the development of its disciplines, and just as often the brilliant results of natural science, which were only possible after the laws had been discovered, were credited to the researchers as a special honour. I think that both sides, praise and blame, have not been entirely fair. Admittedly, the difference exists, that cannot be denied, but whether it is based on the methods of the various disciplines, whether it is as brusque as it seems, whether it is really a principled one that divides the world into two parts, as it were, is doubtful. And here we find ourselves confronted with a problem of extraordinary importance, because it concerns the whole field of human knowledge: are the events that make up the course of world history, are the thousand-fold changes of a language that lead to its gradual development, are the events of daily life that finally force us to establish national economic, legal or sociological concepts, are these not all events in nature?

End of paragraph 04

Start of paragraph 05

So why are there no laws here? So we are faced with the big question: Is there really two kinds of nature, one in which all events take place according to strict, never failing laws, and a second one which does not know such laws, where events follow each other arbitrarily? It will be very difficult for any researcher to believe in such a dichotomy of nature, but it will be all the more necessary for us to understand clearly that and why this dichotomy is not a fundamental one, but in reality only a gradual one. So, out of the whole complex of questions that are connected with it, I only pick out the one: Why does science know strict laws but humanities don't? and I'll try to answer them as far as I can.

End Paragraph 05

Start of paragraph 06

All laws of nature, the word always taken in its strict meaning, are physical laws; whether the processes take place in celestial space as an object of astronomical observation or in the melting pot of the chemist or under the microscope of the botanist and physiologist, if they proceed according to the law, they follow physical laws. It is the task of the physicist to detach these regularities from all coincidental concomitant phenomena; it is up to him whether one grain of sand attracts the other or the sun attracts the planets, his aim is the generally valid law, and so he has gradually embraced the whole of nature with such; I say intentionally the whole of nature, in contrast to dead matter, for all physical laws apply without exception to the living as well as to the lifeless.

End of Paragraph 06

Start of paragraph 07

An admittedly all too naive idea has, so to speak, transferred these laws of nature as properties into the bodies themselves, it has been regarded as a property of the magnet to attract iron or the celestial body to gravitate against each other, as a property of light its ability to be reflected or refracted has been described, and thus knowledge of the laws has been transferred into nature itself. But these laws do not exist in nature, which is first formulated by man, he uses them as a linguistic and mathematical aid and thus only wants to say that the processes in nature take place as if matter, like a rational being, would obey these laws. Newton first established the law of general gravitation and the concept of attraction1 but the latter had absolutely no reality for him, it was only to express in a concise way that the masses under their mutual influence really move as if such a force and nothing else existed.

End Paragraph 07

Start of paragraph 08

The laws of nature, however, even if they refer to seemingly quite different areas1 do not lead existences independent of each other; according to the unity of nature they subsume themselves under more general, in this sense higher laws than their special cases, according to the respective conditions, they appear. The course of events in nature is apparently disorderly and chaotic: countries and seas have changed their roles in the course of time, rain and sunshine pass by us in an irregular sequence, plants, animals and people come into being and pass away with everything that fills their lives, and whoever thinks through just one day of his life with all the small changes that affect him, what a wealth of events crowds together? One would despair of finding a red thread here, which serves as a guide through this tangle of events. But the chaos of the apparition gradually disappears, we notice that the events do not follow each other as arbitrarily as it seems, we realize that not every event is possible and that the apparitions could just as well have taken place in the same way as otherwise. Above all, we find that no event in nature can be reversed by itself, everything strives towards a certain goal; in the short time of a human life we hardly notice the change that has taken place in nature, but in each individual case it is clearly visible to us. We see the stone falling, the water falling from the mountains, but no eye has ever seen a stone rise up by itself or the 'water flowing up the mountain. The scent of an opened smelling bottle will probably soon spread to a larger room, but we will wait in vain for it to retract into the bottle by itself. The embers of the heated stove heat a room; but has it ever been observed that in summertime the July heat of a room would have concentrated in the stove by itself and kindled a fire there? And as in these individual cases, so in general all events in nature strive towards a certain goal; dissipation of energy is what the physicist calls this process, which includes organic and inorganic, dead and living matter and all human activity in the same way.

End of Paragraph 08

Start of paragraph 09

But why, we must ask, are the processes in nature not random? Is it because there are laws? The laws are abstracted from the processes and only prove that these processes are regular, but not why they are regular. At this turning point in human knowledge I must remember a man whose activity I cannot mention here with enough reverence, L. Boltzmann. It was he who first gave a certain and clear interpretation to this direction of general events; he showed, to put it briefly, that the world in its development is constantly changing from less probable to more probable and thus more and more stable states. Boltzmann was the most zealous follower and defender of the atomistic world view, an idea which has never led to contradictions with experience, but which has greatly promoted our knowledge in all areas, an idea according to which all matter consists of enormously numerous and extraordinarily small particles, the molecules, which are in constant and irregular motion, which we perceive as heat. In the case of very simply constituted bodies, such as gases, we know the number and size of these molecules and their speeds with sufficient accuracy and that is why Boltzmann chose gases as the starting point for his observations. The question which he asked himself and which he discussed with all its sharpness in every direction in order to finally decide it completely affirmatively; was The state of a gas, as we know it experimentally through the laws, is it perhaps nothing other than the result of chance, the result of the random individual movements of the countless molecules in it? As I said, the question is affirmative and thus we have the key to everything else in our hands.

End of Paragraph 09

Start of paragraph 10

It is a widespread misconception to believe that random events must also have a random, i.e. indeterminate, result; if the Minister of Finance had done so, the lottery would have been abolished long ago, but experience teaches us that the certainly random events of the drawings do produce a very specific result. But one condition must be fulfilled if such a result is to be expected: the random events must follow one another in large numbers. If we play the well-known game of heads or writing with a coin, the result of each individual toss is completely random and it is possible that heads or writing will be in the majority at the beginning of the game. But if the events, in this case the throws, accumulate, the result strives for a very specific value, the equality, and comes closer and closer to this value over time, to reach it exactly after an infinite number of throws. It should be noted that time itself does not play a role, but only the number of individual events, that it does not matter whether the throws follow each other quickly or slowly, as long as it happens often enough, just as the result of a lottery draw does not depend on whether all the numbers are drawn in the same hour or with intervals of days and years. What in these examples are the throws or draws, which in the case of all matter are the random molecular movements inside the bodies, they are the individual events from which finally the state of a body visible to us according to the laws of probability theory emerges. And since these movements are extraordinarily large in number, and are repeated millions and billions of times a second in the smallest body accessible to our observation, we can and must expect to find the most probable state. In one cubic centimeter of the air surrounding us we have such an enormous number of molecules that, compared to it, the number of people who have ever populated the earth, for example, disappears.

End of Paragraph 10

Start of paragraph 11

All these molecules move in disarray at high speeds, which on average are similar to those of rifle bullets. But the path taken by a single molecule will be quite random, depending on how often and in which directions it collides with other molecules, and each such collision will change its own direction and speed. But this chaos of random events necessarily leads, as Boltzmann's calculation has shown, to exactly those states and properties that we actually observe in gases. A certain distribution of velocities among the molecules will turn out to be the most probable; very small and very large velocities will be correspondingly improbable and therefore rare, those of medium size will occur most frequently and will determine the state of the body to a large extent. Since here, however, the individual events follow each other so quickly that even the shortest observation time, on the other hand, must be regarded as practically infinitely long, we should not be surprised if - in every observation - we find the gas already in its most probable state. This means nothing else than that we observe laws on the bodies which are produced exclusively by chance; but that these laws are different in the different fields of physics, that is because the conditions are by no means the same in all cases under which these movements occur. But since all matter is molecularly constituted, the basic condition for the occurrence of a certain most probable state, namely the extraordinarily large number of random individual events, will also be present everywhere, and thus also the possibility of a law.

End of Paragraph 11

Start of paragraph 12

If we were able to slow down the molecular movement so enormously that we could follow the individual molecular processes, we would perceive nothing but a chaos of random events in which we would search in vain for a law; Eons -of years we would have to wait before under these conditions the body would have reached its most probable state, the state that normally arises in infinitesimal fractions of a second, and so it is clear and must be especially emphasized that where the random events follow each other too slowly, there can be no law.

End of paragraph 12

Start of paragraph 13

I would still like to use a simple example to show how laws of nature come into being. If we play with two dice, the position of the individual dice is completely random on each roll, and so is the number of eyes it shows; but is it therefore also possible to expect all the possible sums, from two to twelve, with the same probability? Not at all. For the number two can only be thrown in a single way, and so can the number twelve; but the number four, for example, can already appear in three different ways through the combination of two-two, one-three and three-one, and since every position of the individual die is equally probable, the sum four can be expected on average three times as often as the sum two or twelve. Of all possible combinations, however, the number seven is, as one can easily convince oneself, the one with the highest probability, and in addition, the numbers that differ from seven upwards or downwards by the same amount, i.e. eight and six, nine and five etc., are always equally probable among themselves, so that with a large number of repetitions of the experiment, the average number of seven will approach more and more, although in each individual case the position of each die is random. If we continue the game indefinitely, we can expect with absolute certainty to have thrown the number seven on average. Here we do not yet speak in practice of a law, at most of a regularity or probability, because we are in fact still dealing with the individual events, the throws; but if these were to follow one another so quickly, say many millions of times in one second, that we could no longer follow the individual moments of the process but only the average result of the whole would be available to us, we would find that the number seven appears every time, and so we could and must pronounce it a law in the strict sense of the word, that one throws the number seven with two dice.

End of paragraph 13

Start of paragraph 14

Thus, natural laws are created; a system consisting of events that are completely random in themselves will, depending on the conditions under which it stands, strive towards a certain most probable and therefore legal state. But the example teaches us even more; it shows us that only after the occurrence of an infinite number of individual events the result can be expected with absolute certainty, but with a finite number of them always only with a certain degree of probability, which however becomes higher and higher the more the events accumulate. Since no natural phenomenon that we can observe really consists of infinitely many parts, there is also no absolute law of nature, all our laws are only laws of probability; but of course, the probability of our prediction can be so enormous that it equals certainty for human conditions.


End of paragraph 14

Start of paragraph 15

There are no exact laws of nature in the mathematical sense of the word; and if there were, we could not be convinced of their exactness, for that would only be possible through experiment, but all experiments are necessarily afflicted with errors, and so we would never achieve complete agreement between law and experiment.

End of paragraph 15

Start of paragraph 16

But from the earlier example with the dice follows something else that is important for the further considerations; if we expect with high probability (with infinite number of throws with certainty) the number seven as the final result, then this is an average value that refers to all previous throws. But the individual litter is random and so we cannot say that we have to throw about seven in the next set of litters, we can only expect to get the average result seven again in the next set of very many litters. So the law is only an average law and applied to the individual case or to its few, it loses its meaning completely.

End of paragraph 16

Start of paragraph 17

To what extent the individual events must accumulate for us to be able to expect a certain average result depends entirely on the degree of probability we require. The number of numbers placed in the lottery in one year, i.e. the number of individual games, already guarantees such a high probability of winning that it can be put into the budget with confidence. The business of the insurance companies is based on the collected statistics, i.e. always on a limited number of cases, but experience shows that these are generally sufficient.

End of paragraph 17

Start of paragraph 18

If, however, the individual events after thousands are counted here perhaps also after millions in one year, then this is still a very infinitesimal number compared to those molecular processes from which the physicist derives his laws, because there are trillions of random processes taking place every second even in the smallest object. In a cubic centimeter of air here, there are so many random collisions between molecules every second that one could only express them by a number with 28 digits; it is therefore easy to see that the probability that our laws possess is of a completely different order of magnitude than that of the winner of the lottery, and that this probability, humanly speaking, is equal to certainty.

End of paragraph 18

Start of paragraph 19

But in the small, time and space, the physical laws probably do not apply; the stone falls to earth and we know exactly the law by which it moves. But whether this law also applies to every arbitrarily small fraction of the movement, for trillionths of a trillionth of a second, is more than doubtful. Probably also here the movement in the smallest times is a coincidental, sometimes faster sometimes slower than our law requires it, maybe a jerky one, but we can't notice anything about that, we only observe the average of the movement and this is lawful. We can certainly indicate the movement of the water in a channel, but the path that the individual water particle describes is completely random and eludes the laws of flow.

End of paragraph 19

Start of paragraph 20

So we have to understand all so-called exact laws as average laws which are not valid with absolute certainty, but with a higher probability the more single processes they result from. All physical laws go back to molecular processes of coincidental nature and from them the result follows according to the laws of probability, as the world in its parts and as a whole changes from less probable states into more probable ones. We have already seen why this transition takes place in the example with the two dice: throwing the number seven is most probable because there are the most possibilities for it, but all possibilities are equally probable among themselves, according to chance. For an event occurs where chance prevails, the more probable it is, the more frequently it occurs. This theorem, known as the law of large numbers1 , is not proven, nor is it provable, but it is taken from the thousandfold experience of mankind and forms the foundation of all probability theory. In fact, it is the only law that governs all events in nature; it states that always those states must occur1 for the existence of which the most possibilities exist.

End of Paragraph 20

Start of paragraph 21

What thus determines the degree of probability of a state, I would like to illustrate very briefly with the following examples. We take a handful of wheat grains and throw them randomly on the ground; no one will expect the grains to form a strikingly regular figure, a star or a circle, letters and words of a familiar meaning, but the result will be some very irregular distribution. Now this distribution, as it actually occurs, is by no means more probable than any of the regular arrangements mentioned earlier, we are only overlooking the fact that there is an enormously large number of irregular arrangements, of regular, i.e. striking, but only a tiny one. But we simply compare the regularity with the irregularity, and since for the latter the number of possibilities is an extraordinarily much larger one, the irregularity will be the average, i.e. most probable result. And so any initially ordered system will by itself go into a state of disorder if it is subject to a large number of random events. If we were to arrange the wheat grains into a regular figure from the beginning and then subject them to quite random vibrations of the ground, the regularity would very soon be lost. Complete disorder is therefore the most likely state; every housewife knows this, every librarian knows this. If the books of a library are initially ordered and the use of them is left entirely to chance, the regularity of their arrangement would soon disappear, simply because it is very unlikely that each book will be put back in its place by chance, since there is only one right place, but a great many wrong places. So it would also be quite improbable, because regular state, if, for example, all molecules in a body had the same speed, and if one were able to make the same one artificially, the body, left to itself, would not remain in this improbable state for a second, but would go over into the ordinary disordered state. Thus, none of us will experience that at a certain moment all people of Vienna who are on the street walk at exactly the same speed, although the possibility of this must be admitted, because this singular case of order is confronted with an extraordinarily large number of opposing possibilities.
End of Paragraph 21


Start of paragraph 22

That is why we have to consider every ordered state, as paradoxical as it sounds, as a perverse one, a state that we can only maintain artificially by constant interventions against nature and against the law of chance. All legal laws, written and unwritten, which keep the course of society in order, are nothing else but such interventions; their effect seems to us to be enormously great, and yet they play only a subordinate role in the household of nature, regulating only a tiny fraction of the general events. But of course, what we see nearby, what surrounds us immediately, seems to us to be large and significant, the distance becomes blurred in space as well as in time and what it contains loses interest. But that is why we do not want to forget that man and his actions mean only a tiny episode in the history of the world.

End of paragraph 22

Start of paragraph 23

Herbert Spencer says: "Evolution is a change from inhomogeneity to uniformity, from indeterminacy to definiteness, from disorder to order. But this is exactly the opposite of the result we have arrived at. Well, it's not exactly the first time that philosophers and naturalists have answered a question in different ways, but perhaps more often than one might think, difference, as here, is more apparent than real. If by order one understands a state of being able to recognize regularities, as Herbert Spencer probably means, then we are in complete agreement, but we have realized that such states are permanent, i.e. accessible to observation, and that they occur of their own accord only because the random individual events that bring them about are completely disordered, for only in this way will a certain state occur predominantly frequently, precisely that which we then call the law of appearance.

End of paragraph 23

Start of paragraph 24

One circumstance of importance must not be overlooked here; if a sequence of random events is to lead to a definable goal, i.e. to a certain average state, the external conditions must not change until just enough events have occurred to provide a useful average value. Because depending on these external conditions the most probable state is always another one and so it would come to no end if these conditions would change approximately as fast as the events follow each other. The number seven is the average value in the game with two dice; for three, four or more dice other numbers would apply and so we could not expect a certain value if during the roll of the dice the number of dice, which is the external condition here, would change at will.

End of paragraph 24

Start of paragraph 25

Thus we would have recognized a series of circumstances that lead to the regularity of an event or, in extreme cases, to an exact law: a large number of random events must occur in such a rapid sequence that we can only observe their average value, and during this time the external conditions must also remain unchanged. All physical laws are created in this way, and the laws of optics would also have no validity if the oscillations of light were not so fast that we only see the average effect of trillions of them. And if we cast the voices of an orchestra several times in order to amplify the sound, and thus really increase the range of sound, then this is again only the game of chance, the effect of which can be expected with such great certainty because the vibrations of sound are also very fast.

End of Paragraph 25

Start of paragraph 26

But one important fact we will learn from all this: No law of nature can be applied with absolute rigour. It is always only a degree of probability, albeit a high one, with which we can expect the occurrence of a certain event; exceptions can and must occur even in the course of infinite time. But such individual phenomena, which contradict the laws of nature, we call miracles and so we necessarily come to assert their possibility. But of course, may we expect to ever experience such an event? If the handful of wheat grains that we scatter on the ground randomly arrange themselves into a predetermined word, then we would like to call this a miracle; it is undoubtedly possible, but no one will experience it, because this singular case of order is contrasted with such an enormous number of equally probable disordered states as a result of the large number of wheat grains and their possible arrangements that we would have to repeat the experiment many times over before the desired one could be achieved. result could be expected. But the number of molecules in the bodies is still of a completely different order of magnitude than the number of wheat grains in our example, so that an exception to a physical law becomes even more improbable and the possibility of its occurrence is completely beyond all human imagination. Do we not have the right to speak of the exactness of the laws of nature? Mathematically we do not, but in the human sense of the word the laws are absolutely valid in so far as we can rightly expect that no human being will ever experience an exception to them.

End of Paragraph 26

Start of paragraph 27

So we see that the laws of nature do not apply with absolute certainty either, but only as long as and insofar as the random individual events whose effect they represent are very numerous. If the number of these decreases, then the degree of probability for the validity of the law decreases at the same time and finally, if it is no longer the averages but the individual events themselves that form the object of our observation, as in the case of dice, we come into the realm of complete randomness, where all regularity has disappeared.

End of paragraph 27

Start of paragraph 28

And so we have reached the point where we must easily recognize why in the field of humanities, as opposed to natural science, laws rarely occur but never do.

End of paragraph 28

Start of paragraph 29

All objects of humanistic research are also processes in nature; whether it is the course of world history, national-economic problems or the emergence and development of languages, it is always a wealth of individual events that are not separate from nature, but take place as a part of it. Emperors and kings are subject to the laws of nature as good as every stone and they cannot move them by a hair's breadth; so why, we must ask, does the course of world history not follow laws as strict as the course of the stars? Certainly, here too, the individual events, namely the actions of men and the circumstances they bring about, are by and large only accidental. Man acts according to his own free will, that is true, but what he wants, what he wants in every moment of his life, that depends on a thousand-linked chain of coincidences. And so the law of coincidence will also apply here, the human race must also change over time from less probable to more probable states. If we compare the condition of a cultural people with that of that wild tribe or even of prehistoric man, as far as we - as far as we - know about him, we find a striking uniformity on this side in contrast to an abundance of inequalities in physical, intellectual and social relations on the other side, which increases all the more the older the culture becomes. But uniformity, as we know, is a very improbable state, which always passes by itself into that of unevenness, disorder, in which, in relation to each individual moment, an average value occurs most frequently, and values that deviate upwards or downwards from it occur all the more rarely the further away they are from the average. Hence the great number of average men in each people, who are confronted by only a few geniuses but also by only a few individuals of very low standing; hence, in material terms, the class of the middle class in relation to the isolated phenomena of the very rich and the very poor. The completely even distribution of both spiritual and material goods would be an extraordinarily improbable state of affairs, but we approach it all the more the further backward we look in culture and in time. Thus, in general, the development of history may be analogous to that of another natural phenomenon, but why does it not show us laws? We may expect laws only where we have the result of a very large number of random events; of course, the events of world history are numerous, but only a comparison can tell us whether there are enough laws resulting from them that would be equivalent in exactness to the physical ones. If the physicist operates with a mass the size of a pinhead and for only one second, a very large number of random events, the molecular movements, have already taken place in his hand during this time. How long would the historian have to wait to have the same number at his disposal? This is difficult to estimate, for the individual event in the development of history cannot be determined; we can perhaps take the individual human life or the individual actions of men for this, but if we ourselves make the certainly exaggerated assumption that out of a hundred million people, each one intervenes effectively once every second in the course of history, it would still casually take three thousand million years until the historian would have at his disposal that abundance of events as the physicist in the earlier case did in the course of a second. Can we still expect laws? But even if our life span were to extend over such periods of time and we could overlook everything that happened at a glance, we would still not discover any law, for such a law, as we know, presupposes that the development of a system always takes place under the same conditions; if these change during the process, the latter always strives towards a different final state, and that the conditions of historical development would change completely more than once in such periods of time is self-evident.

End of Paragraph 29

Start of paragraph 30

Also, the laws of nature are always only average laws; so, if the historian himself were to succeed in making the impossible to survey the course of events in millions of years, he would not be able to say how things would turn out in the following century, but at most what the average result of the following millions of years would be. But it will be said that not only the visible events, but the whole abundance of those imponderables which cannot be grasped are involved in the course of history; but the physicist finds himself in the same position. By imponderables we understand events whose physical correlations remain unknown to us and only too often the physicist comes into the position of having to put up with them: He calls forces the same; and so we also speak in complete analogy of historical, of intellectual forces, but while in our case these imponderables follow each other so quickly that the forces act according to laws, in the case of the historian they still bear the character of chance.

End of paragraph 30

Start of paragraph 31

And as in history, it must be similar in all areas of humanistic research, because where humans determine the individual events, they proceed relatively slowly. Languages and writings come into being and pass away as their development takes place through constant random changes in the use of everyday life. What periods of time are required for this is beyond even a superficial estimate, but certainly hundreds of thousands of years would have to work in an undisturbed sequence in order to be able to speak of a law.

End of paragraph 31

Start of paragraph 32

Of course, the beginnings of regularities can be seen here as in history, grammar and phonetics are examples of this, but how far is the path from these rules to a law of nature? But if we could also follow the development of a language to its very end, that would not be enough; we would have to know thousands of them in order to be able to pronounce it as a law, as the next thousand will be formed on average.

End of Paragraph 32

Start of paragraph 33

And so it may be in all fields where man and his activity is the single event; yes, I believe that in general the spiritual level of a people goes through the same development. From less probable states it passes through an infinite series of random events into more probable ones; from the almost uniform level of animals and inferior species of man, the highly differentiated state of education and culture with all its contrasts gradually develops. If we did not have to fear too much to leave the safe ground of numbers, it would probably be tempting to trace the spiritual types with their regularities, such as the styles in the various fields of art and their development back to the same general cause.

End of paragraph 33

Start of paragraph 34

Thus a deep gap appears to exist between the fields of exact and humanistic science, and yet the difference is only a gradual one, determined by the different objects of research on both sides and by their relation to the life span of man. But this is limited and given; it is very large compared with the individual events of the molecular world and that is why there are laws here; but it is small compared with the processes of development in the humanistic field and that is why there are no laws here.

End of paragraph 34

Start of paragraph 35

This fortuitous position of man in nature causes the difference; an intellect whose life span reached into the millions of years, for him this difference could disappear. Aptly Schiller says: "Higher spirits see the delicate cobwebs of a deed running through the whole stretching of the world system and perhaps attached to the remotest frontiers of the future and past - where man sees nothing but the fact floating in free air.

End of Paragraph 35

Start of paragraph 36

But from this we can also see how unjust the accusation is that the humanists are unable to put the results of their research into exact laws, and further, how hopeless it is to search for them in areas where there are none. It is given to the humanists to observe and study the individual events which, even if by chance, are certainly capable of captivating the interest as much as the individual human life itself, which is after all only the product of chance; we, who observe the lawful averages, are probably forever denied insight into the individual processes of matter, as far as human foresight reaches.

End of Paragraph 36

Start of paragraph 37

I spoke earlier of the apparent gap between exact and humanistic research, as it is perhaps most evident when we choose physics and history as the two representatives; I have called this gap an apparent one, because in fact it is not unbridgeable. Between the two extremes, all the transitions can be found, from both sides we meet each other halfway. Are all natural sciences able to establish exact laws? Not at all. The so-called descriptive natural sciences such as botany, zoology, mineralogy, no less geology or meteorology, as well as the whole range of medical disciplines, they all know no laws in the exact sense of the word, because in all these fields the individual events follow one another far too slowly. In botany and zoology, in so far as they are the same descriptive nature, the life of the individual is the single event; only in the course of geological epochs do they multiply in such a way that, if not yet laws, then at least regularities come to light. Here, too, we see the development from the more uniform, i.e. improbable, state of the simple cells gradually progressing to the more probable of the differentiated species and genera as we know them today. Certainly, the end of this development has not yet been reached, and it can be said with some certainty that it will never be reached, because while all life is moving towards the most probable state, the external conditions are constantly changing, so that in each case another state becomes the most probable before the first is reached. Hence the extinction of species in the course of the geological epochs and the appearance of new ones, which again strive towards another final goal, apparently following a certain determinant, in reality the law of chance.

End of paragraph 37

Start of paragraph 38

The constancy of our species in the course of foreseeable times speaks for the fact that already quite probable conditions are reached, but the calculation teaches that, even if these occur by far the most frequently, we can and even have to meet from time to time also less probable, deviating from it, only these deviations will occur the more rarely the more significant the amount of the deviation is. The bean develops into a bean again and again in generations because this is its most probable development, but among the billions of cases, random deviations must also occur from time to time, mutations the biologist calls them, which are only so rare because they are just improbable, and the greater the deviation, the less probable they are. It is not impossible that an apple tree suddenly bears cherries, it would only be such a strong deviation from the most probable case that it is already unlikely to happen in any way and its occurrence would be tantamount to a miracle, i.e. we consider the case to be practically impossible.

End of paragraph 38

Start of paragraph 39

The formation of the most probable state corresponding to the prevailing circumstances is called adaptation when it concerns living organisms; but the process is by no means limited to living things; it occurs just as well, and for quite the same reasons, in dead matter. The freezing of water at zero degrees is an adaptation to this temperature, for this particular arrangement of molecules is not the only possible one at zero degrees, but it is by far the most probable. Thus, the theory of descendence appears to us as a special case of the general law of probabilities.

End of paragraph 39

Start of paragraph 40

But even if there are no laws in descriptive botany and zoology, there are still laws. Everyone knows the leaf of the oak tree and will know how to distinguish it from a hundred others, and yet none of them is completely different. In size, weight and form, there are variations around a common type, which is the most probable for matter under the circumstances under which it exists in the oak leaf; and again, small deviations from this state are much more probable than large ones, so that we will never experience an oak tree bearing lime leaves, for example. So there is a certain law, but no law; if we wanted to try to establish one, for example, for the weight of the leaves, we would have to determine the average value of many millions of them, then we could say that the weight of the oak leaf is so and so great. But again, this would not apply to the individual leaf, whose weight is random, but only to the average of the next millions that we might examine. In this way we would gradually approach the exactness of a physical law as we moved on to ever larger and larger numbers, but without ever reaching it, because the number of oak leaves in the whole world is still many times smaller than the number of molecules in the smallest particle of matter still visible to the naked eye.

End of Paragraph 40

Start of paragraph 41

Since there are, after all, many more plants and animals than humans, and their life span is also a shorter one, one understands the greater prominence of laws in these areas compared with the humanistic ones; but strict laws are missing here as well as there. Only where the biologist or the physiologist approaches the areas of molecular processes to some extent, one can expect to encounter stricter laws with time, such as those found by the mineralogist in the formation of crystals, where it is essentially a question of molecular effects.

End of paragraph 41


Start of paragraph 42

One might be tempted to attribute the lack of laws in the descriptive natural sciences to the influence of living matter as opposed to dead matter; there is no reason for this. That it is not the nature of the events, but only the number of them that is the decisive factor, we see this in other natural sciences, which, like physics, deal only with dead matter, but nevertheless know no laws. A typical example of this is meteorology. Where does the proverbial unreliability of weather forecasting come from? only from the too small number of individual events from which it is derived. Vienna has a certain average annual temperature, derived from observations of more than a hundred years, but can we therefore claim that the average annual temperature of the coming year will be so and so much? Certainly not; it will approach this value and strong deviations from it will be unlikely, but with some certainty we can only say that on average over the next hundred years the temperature will show this value again. But if the time scale were to suddenly shrink to such an extent that a hundred years seemed like a small fraction of a second, then the low meteorological probability would become a physical certainty.

End of paragraph 42

Start of paragraph 43

But there are natural sciences in which the individual events follow one another much more slowly; in geological processes they can be separated from one another by millennia and, if you wanted to put the formation of an earth into a law, you would have to know the life history not of one but of thousands of earths in order to be able to predict the average for the next thousands.

End of paragraph 43

Start of paragraph 44

Thus the descriptive sciences are by their nature much closer to humanistics than to physics, though outwardly, according to the objects of their research, they are far removed from it; they fill a considerable part of the gap which seems to exist between exact science and humanistics. But from the other side we will also have to expect an advance into this gap; only not all disciplines will be equally suitable for the formation of regularities. Above all, we will be able to expect them in those places where random events follow each other as quickly and frequently as possible, especially in areas that deal with the events of daily life.

End of paragraph 44

Start of paragraph 45

Let me pick out a national economic example. Money and the value of money changes hands daily and hourly; the guilder rolls, but in which direction, that is left to chance. It will depend on the chance of the moment whether someone buys a piece of bread or a hat, and whether the guilder the baker takes will go to a tailor or cobbler. Of course, apart from these random circulations there are also circulations caused by external forces; one of the most powerful of these is, for example, the tax, but since it takes away from us only a small fraction of what is otherwise free, let us not overestimate its influence on the movement of money as a whole. But if the circulation is - essentially - determined by chance, then the laws of probability also apply. What then must be the distribution of property? In the case of only a few individuals it would be completely random and lawless, but in a state the number of individual events may already be so great that a regularity results. The most probable state, to which such a random distribution strives for, is a quite certain one, but it is not the uniformity, that would be rather very improbable, but that a certain size of possession, the average value, is to be found with most individuals, but smaller and larger possessions on the other hand occur the more rarely, the more they deviate from this average value, so that no possession at all or an enormously large equally improbable case are. No doubt this is the picture as the modern state shows it, but it certainly has not been like this all the time. With uncultivated peoples we find a much more even distribution, which in primeval times may well have gone as far as complete equality. But such a distribution is, as I said, extremely improbable, and so here too the development has taken its course according to the general law from the improbable to the probable. Whether the final state has been reached cannot be said, since the statistics are unfortunately too deficient to compare the real state with the required one exactly, but on the whole they probably confirm the conclusions drawn.

End of paragraph 45

Start of paragraph 46

But if the most probable distribution of goods or a state similar to it has occurred, this does not mean that a certain individual will in the long run also have a certain property; on the contrary, it follows with necessity that the bearers of such a property will continually change their individuality; the poor become rich, and rich families become impoverished in the course of time. What remains constant is the supposed distribution of possessions among the individuals, but not their individuality. There is another important conclusion to be drawn from this: if the distribution of goods -really is essentially based on chance, that is, if it is carried out with the necessity of a natural process, then, as long as the cultural state remains the same, we will not be able to change it. What seems to be a natural necessity, that the greatest poverty and the greatest wealth coexist by chance, is often enough seen as injustice, and the call for compensatory justice, possibly for a completely equal distribution of property, is often raised. But that would be just as unreasonable as complaining that the bricks of a new building do not rise by themselves. Nothing will be changed in this distribution, for it is the necessary consequence of the respective cultural condition; but complete equality in distribution would be such an enormously improbable condition that it would never occur by itself, and if it were possible to create it artificially, in the shortest time it would return to natural inequality. But does it follow from this that one must pay homage to the kismet of the Orientals? I do not think so. It is in human nature that everyone is closest to himself, not only each individual, but every class, every society in the state, and that the well-being and "\i\' before the neighbor is closer to us than the fate of people unknown to us. Thus, everyone will strive to locally influence the state in his favor, but what he gives himself, he necessarily takes away from another, whose fate, removed from his eyes, is indifferent to him. So social efforts will not hinder the course of nature, will not change the fate of the general public, and only those who are willing to give themselves to utopias and do not look beyond their nearest neighborhood can believe that they can permanently influence the fate of men by such means; but water cannot be forced by laws to flow towards the mountain.

End of paragraph 46


Start of paragraph 47

It is not the place to go into further consequences of this view, otherwise it could be shown that some problems of the national economy are related to the fact that, for example, the decreasing tendency of the interest rate with advancing culture is a consequence of the gradual convergence towards the most probable distribution of goods. But I just wanted to point out here that in the humanistic field as well as in the descriptive natural sciences, too, regularities come to light when the case is favourable, i.e. when a large number of individual events come into play. If we had precise statistics of human possessions and their distribution in different countries and times - which is theoretically quite possible - then also in this field laws could be established which would be completely equivalent to the laws of the descriptive natural sciences.

End of paragraph 47

Start of paragraph 48

And so the series of disciplines that encompass knowledge of the outside world is continuously closed; nowhere do we see a fundamental difference, everywhere only a gradual one, as is given by the very nature of the objects themselves. If humanistic science does not provide such clear laws as physics, we know that this is by necessity in its essence and that the application of other methods will not change anything about it, because where there are no laws, none can be found.*)

End of paragraph 48

Start of paragraph 49

*) Among the disciplines mentioned here, one will perhaps be missed which is considered the prototype of exactness and whose laws are afflicted with absolute truth, namely mathematics. This alone does not even fall within the scope of our considerations, because its objects are not given in nature, they are of a purely conceptual nature; in nature there is no sphere, no circle, no straight line, and the laws relating to these entities do not originate in nature, they lie in its definitions.

End of Paragraph 49

Start of paragraph 50

If I briefly summarize what has been said, I come to the following conclusion: All events in nature are the result of random occurrences; the greater the number of individual events of which an apparition is composed under certain external conditions, the more likely it is that it has a certain character, the more certain regularities emerge. If the probability that such an event will occur each time is so great that it becomes certainty in human terms, then we speak of a "law". However, this is only possible with the large number of individual events that occur in molecular processes. In all other fields there are no laws, only regularities, and these become all the more dubious the smaller the number of events from which they are derived, in order to finally, with too small a number of them, turn into random phenomena. The living does not play any role in this, just the two end members of the series, physics and geology, are exclusively concerned with dead matter, but their time scales are different over all measure and therefore the difference in their results.

End of Paragraph 50

Start of paragraph 51

Very deficient, I know, is the image we thus construct of what is happening in the world, but it is a quite uniform and self-contained one; it eliminates the old dichotomy between exact research and those sciences which do not know strict laws; it shows that there are no really exact laws of nature, that all human knowledge differs from the outside world only by different degrees of probability. And these degrees are not conditioned by the nature of the research, they are given by the nature of the object of each discipline, and so each will gladly and enviously accept the results of the others. Our view, however, also leaves the whole world, whether living or dead, as a thoroughly uniform recognition, subject to a single law of probability.

End of Paragraph 51

Start of paragraph 52

And our alma mater, is it anything other than an image of this wide world? Is it not a microcosm that encompasses everything the world has to offer? Here, anyone who wants to prepare for life's struggles will find the world spread out before them, but not only the world as it is, but, and this is what makes the university fundamentally different from all other educational institutions, also the world as it has become. Only a fool can see in it the superfluous, to the insightful one the development in every field also shows the most probable state to which it is heading; only in this way can we hope to have a look into the future. But is the university as an institution not itself the result of centuries of development? Surely even this is only the accumulation of a large number of random events, under the effects of which the university, as it is now, has turned out to be the most appropriate state. But we know that such a development only continues as long as the external conditions of the university do not change. Well, for the University there has always been, and still is, essentially only one such condition to which its whole constitution and innermost being is adapted, and that is the absolute freedom of research and teaching. As long as this is preserved for us, and it will be preserved, our alma mater will always be a faithful reflection of the whole world: "glorious as on the first day".

End of Paragraph 52

St. Gilgen, August 28th, 1908.
