Summary of "Locating possible sources of physical indeterminism"
Contribution to SATURN by Karl Svozil



Svozil's contribution starts with the observation that contemporary physics is postulating the mind-boggling thesis that,
on the most fundamental level virtually all ``individual'' events such as the creation, scattering, or annihilation
of a single quantum, occur at random. This conjecture is augmented by a totally deterministic evolution
of the microphysical state; at least in between irreversible measurements.


Subjectively, both physical determinism as well as indeterminism can be perceived as very discomforting.
Because determinism appears to exclude personal freedom of choice, whereas an irreducible stochastic chaotic lapse of events might also severely hamper providence and free will.


Svozil presents a short history of physical (in-)determinism. He argues that, while the nineteenth century represented a time of almost pathetic believe in absolute rationalism
-- claiming that all unknowns are merely epistemic in origin --
an undertow of ontological indeterminism stated to build during the Belle Époque.

This culminated after the first world war with the eruption of ``our new quantum mechanics,''
with Born, Bohr, Heisenberg and Pauli promoting its irreducible statistical stance.
On the other side, some of its early pioneers, such as Planck, Einstein, Schrödinger and De Brogie
did not consider quantum theory as a complete description of Nature.
Some of these latter protagonists, most notably Einstein and Schrödinger, grew increasingly alienated with the interpretation of the formalism they had helped to create; and with the way it is perceived.
Alas, and despite continuing attempts to propose a more complete theory to this day, their criticism ceased.
Recent times saw a two developments: In experimental physics, single quantum experiments -- such as double slit interference of single quanta, as well as quantum random number generators based on the measurement of single quanta --
corroborated the predictions in quantum mechanics.
And in theoretical physics, the paradigm that the quantum evolution essentially permutes any state, yielded proposals such as quantum teleportation and quantum cryptography, which were later corroborated by experiment.
On the formal level, powerful mathematical theorems -- most notably by Bell and Kochen and Specker -- block certain conceivable completions of the quantum formalism.

Besides quantum measurement there are quantum fluctuations, both spontaneous and stimulated, that govern the ``ex nihilo'' emission, scattering and absorption of individual quanta in (many-particle) quantum field theory.

Another development that originated already in the Belle Époque was the conception of ``deterministic chaos''
-- a contradictio in adjecto -- which incorporates a suitable totally deterministic evolution revealing
the infinite algorithmic information content that is supposed to be contained in the initial value of the system.
Operationally, such systems are exceedingly susceptible to small changes of the initial state -- the system is ``unstable'' and performs unpredictably.

Before discussing issues related to the aforementioned scenarios for indeterminism
Svozil points out that, strictly formally speaking, it is provable that is neither possible to either prove or disprove indeterminism in physics.
This is partly due to the finite character of all observations, and also due to reduction to the famous incompleteness theorems in formal logic and computer science.
Because, on the one hand, it is impossible to rule out lawful behavior by finite means -- nobody can exclude an infinity of possible laws.
On the other hand, any apparently finite sequence that is ``explained'' by some causal law, can ``go wrong'' and behave differently at later times,
thereby disproving a particular lawful behavior.

Svozil argues that, at least in principle but not for all practical purposes, the existence of quantum mechanical randomness remains highly controversial.
Because there is no principle that would allow us to establish a cut which could distinguish between an (supposedly classical) observer and a quantum object.
This is due to the universal validity of the quantum evolution, which essentially permutes the state.

Also classical instabilities appear to be epistemic rather ontic; and merely driven by our, for all practical purposes, inability to identify the exact initial state of such a classical system.

Nevertheless, suppose one is inclined to believe in such gaps of the law of physics, thereby insisting that the lapse of events is not solely determined by immanent causes.
In such cases a dualistic scenario may be possible due to the possibility of utilizing these gaps as a sort of ``interface'' between our universe and the beyond -- by creatio continua.
However, the mere existence of gaps in the laws of physics not necessarily imply this possibility, although they represent a viable scenario for dualism.

