we tried to host this three different times on third try so we we just keep trying.

%HESITATION and then our first in originating donors shock fillet will speak and off we will go over the next four days.

I am sure conversations will stumble and then soar and stumble again and then soar again but that is all okay.

please be generous with yourselves with us and with one another as we venture arm as they said in a recent letter to many of you we are here for just one little thing to change reality itself.

it is okay to mourn the loss of certainty with the end of a world view it is also okay to laugh at the same.

it is also okay to be provoked a puzzled we're just confused indeed if you were not confused over the next few days were probably not listening.

finally for sort of technical matters first please turn off your cell phones or silence them you were in the theater now and in more ways than one.

this is a movie with a science fiction nervous system no less is John Phillip Santos would say turns out the John is more right than any of us can probably imagine will let us try.

also also the digital tour there's some confusion about the digital to work tomorrow morning that is a digital tour and it will take place here not in the library so please don't shop in the library please please show up here and Amanda will take us to the to the archives also please wear a mask inside for the sake of others and again after my talk which will start right now we're going to have a five minute stretch okay all right we are we ready.

all right here we go.

so this little talk is called on radar in revelation the joke I often tell which no one ever last that you probably won't either %HESITATION all explain why is we go on here.

sh first allow me to tell you a story.

the story of how these archives of the impossible came about.

hello allow me also to be what I happen to be an academic a professor a nerd who loves books strange words and even stranger people.

I do not I do so not to be charged any or all pake or trendy.

I do so to set the intellectual tone of our gathering and signal immediately where I hope some of this might yet go.

over the next few days yes but also over the next few years.

in my own impossible hopes these archives constitute fantastically rich historical deposits but they are not just about the past.

they're also about the future.

the future of knowledge the future of higher education and most of all the future of what we to constantly call the human.

these deposits after all suggested a thousand bright and dark ways that the human is not only what we have so carefully thought and so fiercely said over the last few centuries.

in a few words to the humanness local historical and socially constructed.

these deposits also point to what human civilizations have largely been about over the last few millennia and I've often realize namely that the human is also non local inside and outside of space and time in a single word costs make.

and yes I mean that in perfectly Syrians.

in two thousand ten published in intellectual history of the most abused and most misunderstood word the paranormal.

the book was authors of the impossible.

the paranormal it turns out was not born in the tabloids.

but in some of the most elite intellectuals and academics locations on the planet.

in figures like Alfred Russel Wallace who co discovered the principles of natural selection with Charles Darwin and call these phenomena spiritual or super human.

we're Friedrich Nietzsche who related his futurity as much to Darwin is ancient Greek polytheism and him to what he knew and saw as the coming super humans or uber mensch.

or the mid twentieth century French writer Anne Michelle who spoke and wrote of the Ponce score two man literally a kind of super human thinking.

I could damage institutions like Cambridge Stanford Harvard Duke Princeton and the university of Virginia all sponde or sponsored research programs where these phenomena were variously called psychical this is the word of the British chemist and physicist Sir William crooks in eighteen eighty four %HESITATION seven super normal the Cambridge train classes Frederick Myers paranormal first in French around nineteen oh three super human William James at Harvard and a bit later psychological the university of Chicago botanist JB and Lisa Ryan at Duke.

the newly invented words just kept coming and coming and coming.

it was as though scientists and intellectuals wanted to name something that could not be named but the brightness of the core of who and what we have long been and will become more so.

the same continues today of course and so here we are.

I've tried my hand at this naming the undeniable.

by an author of the impossible I mean an author who writes about well documented historical events and exceptionally common human experiences that are not supposed to happen but do anyway.

and who by riding in theorizing about these impossible things renders them newly plausible imaginable thinkable in a word real.

I mean an author who makes the impossible possible.

I featured for such authors of the book one was shocked to lay a French born American astronomer computer scientist an investor in advanced bio medical technology who is written numerous acclaimed books about the UFO phenomenon.

sometime in the early winter of two thousand and fourteen I was with shock in Berkeley California when he asked me a question.

he was beginning to worry about his research files and he wanted to know if I had any suggestions about the university that might preserve them.

I went back to ricin contacted what should research center to see if we could host such a collection the director at that point in the pack to listen to us yesterday and asked me to approach shock with the possibility of sending his papers to the center.

a long conversation on other visits to San Francisco came to a happy conclusion when Jacques visited rice in March of two thousand sixteen and agreed to a major gift.

I then approached another key figure in the UFO literary world with the same possibility in mind Whitley Strieber.

Willie is a horror and science fiction writer who also wrote what is without a doubt the finest autobiographical duction account of the twentieth century book called communion came out in nineteen eighty seven.

which will be also happens to be a Texan having grown up in San Antonio just down the road.

will he responded enthusiastically and donated thousands of letters that he had received from individuals who experience contact and recognize their anomalous experiences in the song.

then came at with may it was the nuclear physicist who helped to lead the U. S. government's classified remote viewing or psychic espionage program from nineteen eighty five to nineteen ninety five.

at one point called project Stargate this was a very serious enterprise that was well funded by government agencies for over two decades mostly because as may has repeatedly argued the remote viewers kannst consistently obtained empirical results that were impossible to deny.

whether remote viewing was impossible or not it worked and it still does of course some of you in this very room can speak to this much more effectively than I can you were there you did this you still do this.

the intellectual gravity of the gifts of the latest river in may created a kind of black hole.

perfect soon others were attracted by the gravitational pull and approached us with their own offers of generosity including many others who Amanda folky the present director of which research center generously accepted into the university's archival collection.

just to list here there's there are collections on scientific studies of unexplained aerial phenomena donated by Richard Haynes their collections on the history of your apology on the disclosure movement donated by Brenda Gensler Diana Walsh the soca Larry Bryan and behold they'll keep C. Harris their collections on the history and practice a physical mediumship.

when she donated by Stuart Alexander and Leslie Kean.

on the intersections between anthropology and parapsychology donated by Stanley quicker and finally on popular culture in the paranormal.

dot dot dot donated by Charles and Robert fuller.

Karen Everett and Eric Davis.

although we have not counted down the overall some of the growing collection must number into the hundreds of thousands of documents books film and recordings.

the song is greater than the individual parts.

the project as a whole is based on the working hypothesis that it is all connected.

from the UFO and the NDP.

to the poltergeist the medium in the afterlife to the angel the alien the precognitive dream the telepathic communication and the adoption of that.

that is after all why all of this material sits in the same archival collection.

collecting is connecting.

collection is connection.

it may not be all connected of course and it is indeed very difficult to separate the endless weaves in Webster physical events and actual experiences intentional fakery and disinformation psychopathology and dramatic and rush.

above all it is the most severe challenge to our rationalist and scientific sensibilities to come to terms with the trickster like or elusive nature of what many have simply called the phenomenon.

that's one of my rice colleagues Alexander is she a put it so well with respect to German English romantic literature and enlightenment rationalism there is often a kind of tyranny of clarity at work here.

such clarity in actual fact %HESITATION Kluge or races or renders invisible precisely that which we need to see.

the stars after all can not be seen at the brightness of mid day.

they're completely invisible.

if we only had noon in which to see none of us would believe that we are in fact floating in a sea of stars.

we are.

perhaps this is why one quickly becomes baffled.

the fondled and be dazzled in these archives.

one is approaching midnight at noon.

but that very confusion is likely part of the point of these historical deposits indeed maybe it is V. point.

this is certainly why we need serious researchers to look closely at this material to help his first see the sea of stars and then to fathom how they might be all connected to recognize as it were our own cost the contents.

we are floating right now in outer space.

but let us be aware that such a project of collecting as connecting of comparing strange things in arriving at even stranger conclusions is neither innocent nor neutral.

in academic speak we are working toward a new critical theory a new comparison that is neither modern nor postmodern neither post human nor transhumanist as the Duke literary critic Priscilla wall put it so powerfully in one of our opening conversations the phenomenon subverts every social construction including and especially unjust and immoral ones.

this is why the same impossible phenomenal in nineteen century spiritualism for example have been linked so tightly to social justice and the envisioning a new moral norms around gender sexuality and race.

as a scholar of religion and race Stephen family.

has taught us over the years this is also why African American visionaries are often so attracted an adept at esoteric thinking and you have a logical vision.

they are psychologically and spiritually doubled split in two by the racist absurdities of society.

and so they see right through and then beyond the social fictions like the UFO they hover above an outside society even as they are also in a.

and there is more.

is the university of Chicago anthropologist Hussein Ali of grammar put it in another of our opening conversations the secular assumptions of the academy are simply not adequate to the high strangeness of the phenomenon.

nor are the two certain a pissed jeans or orders of knowledge of what we have come to call science and religion.

neither really work very well.

both need to be left behind at some point dropped like the two heavy gear of the California firefighters who need to escape a raging fire but can not if they will not drop drop their gear.

to drop your gear.

whatever thank here happens to be.

if I had to crystallize these archives of the impossible down to a single sound bite and I suppose that's why I'm standing here.

I would say this.

impossible phenomenal especially of a spontaneous crisis or dramatic nature.

constitute an awakening inside a story.

and early and usually symbolically coded awareness that we are being written and in ways that we may well want to write a new I think this is the most common thing experiences have told me they was they say things like it was as if I were in a novel or it was as if I were in a movie.

which I always respond you are.

%HESITATION the impossible in short is all about dropping our gear.

the challenge is that this awakening is seldom if ever purer or absolute.

the truth is almost always expressed in symbol synchronicity or dream.

where it is displaced in time or agency we fear ourselves we will not own our own spatiotemporal vas nous and so we trick ourselves into believing that what is doing this most extraordinary thing is someone or something else we tell ourselves a story and we think we are that story.

but we are not done story we're telling that story and so we are also standing outside it.

allow me a deceptively simple example.

one that was just told to me a few weeks ago.

this one involved a friend named rich.

there's rich.

and his beloved leather hat but you can also see in the background.

Richard Dyer both inappropriately fond of big foot.

here is a photo of the two of us at a recent social event actually at the home of Scott Jones was sitting right there.

we had each worn a big trip sure to please the other not knowing the other was going to wear one.

minus cooler of course.

rich wanted to tell me about the holding his hat though he didn't want to talk about it but.

about six months ago which was working in a study in his New Mexico home is a cinematographer that matters as he edited behind a closed door he heard his wife Stephanie call out to him from the kitchen loudly and clearly bring me your hat.

he found the request art and so your back ever so eloquently what.

Stephanie yelled again bring me your hat.

like all wives husbands rich finally complied he got up to go look for the hat when he came out into the living room next to his office there it was sitting over a flaming candle quietly burning a hole in it.

which quickly pulled out from the fire and put it out exasperated he found Stephanie in the kitchen what the hell why were you yelling for my hand why was it on the candle Stephanie looked rich like a crazy person should never said a word much less yield one.

now there are many possible interpretations of this story one might want to argue that rich unconsciously smelled the burning leather from the next door room intuited the danger and got himself to act to a kind of psychological Bruce.

maybe but the smoke detector a few feet outside his office door did not go off.

the smoke was minimal and the thick door was shut tight.

much more possibly and certainly much more comparatively there are in fact thousands of other similar stories from the literature that involve very precise cognitions of physical events very much like this one.

what a day.

and miles out over a week and thousands of miles out even three or thirty years out and who knows how many Brazilians spacetime miles out.

I am very much with the anthropologist Eric Wargo who's also sitting here.

the data on precognition is overwhelming once one honestly looks at it.

whatever time and so history is it very much appears the times experience flowing flows from the future as well as from the past maybe space time doesn't move at all maybe it just is all there the past the present and the future in one gigantic glass block this Eric says.

this is what many cosmologists are telling us today and that would make a lot of sense actually it would render the impossible possible here.

in any case that fell backward flowing history really matters.

in rich's case it may well prevented a house fire.

never Lucien every term such a pre cognition was profoundly adaptive it preserve property in life.

but note that rich could not own his own knowing or even the skeptics unconscious smelling.

he had to hear his wife yell at him in order to asked the truth could only work through a trick.

which is all of us.

we all live in stories that we tell ourselves that we think we are but in truth are simply too small and been all.

we are exotic to the core.

in the language of my own humanistic training we are always caught in a mess a story in which we were born that is so fundamental so obvious and so seemingly natural that we do not realize it is a story and not the actual truth things.

please be careful here this Jason Josephson storm has reminded us the claim that one has no math is the purest myth of all.

this myth of secularism of having no maths is precisely the story we have to awaken in and then from now not so that we can finally be without mess but so that we can live in a different mass tell ourselves a better story one that is more capacious more just more compassionate and I would add more costly.

this is why.

some of us are no longer no longer working in the in the academy under what choices and storm has him as quote the academy under the sign of the negative on quote.

we no longer wish to say only no.

although it is terribly important to do that as well we want to say no to all that isn't just harmful and deadly but we also want to say yes to all the responses of ecstatic and life affirming.

we want to do both.

and yet something more as we work slowly but surely toward what I've called the super humanities.

again this is not the human the post human or the transhuman this is something much more candid with figures as diverse as Alfred Russel Wallace Friedrich Nietzsche William James and Gloria and so do I have called the super human.

something closer to what the Mexican American filmmaker and writer John Phillip Santos has so beautifully described as the time coded our clients in our blood.

that is our fantastically mixed or mestizo DNA that speaks to us as much from the far future is from the deep pass.

in the voice John literally heard not someone like rich I should add we are not locked down here in the present we are spread out through space and time history is hyper dimensional it is vast so are we.

I know that some of that might strike you as too hopeful.

where is too positive where is just impossible that is your math.

but that is precisely my point we didn't call them our clients is impossible for nothing.

I like to joke that there are only two things you have to understand in order to really understand the UFO radar and revelation.

no one ever lasted my joke.

probably because he grades too much against our assumptions about the world and ourselves but the joke is true.

engineering.

a strong to me biology medicine neuroscience and physics are as important as the history religions anthropology history philosophy and literary criticism.

I have spoken about such things to historians theologians and literary critics at Harvard Duke and Stanford but I have also spoken to propulsion engineers and federal funding agencies at MIT and sat with neuroscientists statisticians computer scientists and quantum physicists on advisory boards in Europe and the US.

whatever these impossible phenomena are.

and they are.

they are inseparable from gravity space time contagion genetics evolution justice the human brain predation trauma technology possession colonialism folklore and above all consciousness itself.

in truth to study the impossible is to study everything.

but how.

how do we step back take in all the pixels it appeared to us squint a bit perhaps and finally make a picture pop.

many of us are frankly in denial.

to speak the terms of the philosophy of science we are stuck in a kind of linear constable physicalism with point a materially causing point P. material material the crossing point C. in a one way arrow of time.

as a consequence we have no idea what to do with the most obvious fact of our existence this does not seem to be physical at all consciousness should show.

you would think the humanities might have something to say to this question.

alas they have generally added immeasurably to the crisis they have locked themselves down into what we might recognize as a nearly complete historicism localism contextualism and constructivist.

we are chained to the cave floor now by our own self made changed alas.

as a direct consequence we have no way of accepting much less understanding the reality of events that are very very physical and yet clearly violate our present understanding of space time matter and mind.

I think dreams that are obviously precognitive the events of the next day or week or year encounters with dead husbands.

telling their wives were to find the body and why they should not warn.

humanoids emerging out of nowhere.

implants and noses ears and legs super sexualized adoptions and military radar returns in the sky.

none of this makes the least bit of sets in our present order of knowledge.

so to preserve that order of knowledge we simply deny it all and it's kind of gigantic intellectual spiritual cop out.

the situation might seem dire at the moment for those who refused the academy under the sign of the negative but it also seems to be shifting moving even occasionally flipping.

there is real reason for hope.

the New York times articles at Leslie changes call written since December of two thousand seventeen have frankly been game changing thank you Leslie.

but who really puts these UFO admissions together with Leslie's equally sophisticated work on the survival of bodily dot.

who puts the UFO in the NDP together can we even recognize and then connect these dots.

I think we can begin by admitting our own vast ignorance that is by admitting what we do not know and cannot know with our present ways of knowing.

is not an intellectual community first and foremost a community that knows that it does not know.

this is how we might come to terms with the Harvard psychiatrist John Mack called on to logical shock.

that is this disturbing conviction the one has encountered something more real than reel that fits no available social or social scientific model of reality mostly because it because it is neither a subject nor object.

can we wake up inside a story and recognize it as a story as a vast and costly class.

that's a lot I admit.

more than is appropriate for a few opening remarks.

still I trust it is clear that I think that these are because of the impossible and by extension the days and evenings of this long weekend together are finally about collecting and admitting as many dots as we can and then see how we might connect him to form new pictures of ourselves our cultural screens.

the challenge of course is that we ourselves are dots in the pictures we're trying to see.

characters in the stories we may no longer believe.

when can I suppose fear the results.

one can also laugh.

humor after all is a form of transcendence one can only laugh at something one has moved beyond or stands outside.

shock is often said that the phenomena itself has a sense of humor.

even if we do not always understand that human that tumor.

hence the aliens that appeared to the good police officer and you know who the Brasco I love the story I think because the guy who runs the really is such a place.

the little alien is said to have said this to the good police officer.

we want you to believe in us but not too much.

whether such an impossible thing happened or not the basic message of the story is always struck me as exactly right the truth in the truck.

I hope we can listen to our apparently extraterrestrial friend.

I hope I hope we can be like the phenomenon itself believing the stories that we hear but not too much.

that is my wish anyway for all of the dots sitting here we're listening in from afar issue form the pictures we ourselves constitute and imagine that we are.

may we imagine ourselves to something more now maybe form new pictures.

in our program begin shortly thank you very much.
